Variational inference for network reconstruction from abundance data

Joint work with Julien Chiquet and Mahendra Mariadassou

We are interested in the reconstruction of an ecological network based on abundance data. More specifically, we suppose that the abundance of a series of species have been measured in a series of replicates or sites, together with various descriptors of each sites (covariates). Based on this, we aim at reconstructing the set of direct interactions between the species, that is interactions that not mediated some other species, nor due the effect of some (observed) environmental factor.

In multivariate statistics, finding direct interactions resorts to network inference (or network reconstruction) for which the Gaussian graphical model (GGM) provides a canonical framework. Unfortunately, the Gaussian assumption does not apply to count data, such as abundance data. To circumvent this limitation, state-of-the-art approaches use two-step strategies that first transform counts to pseudo Gaussian observations and then apply a (partial) correlation-based approach from the abundant literature of GGM inference.

We adopt a different stance by relying on a latent model where we directly model counts by means of Poisson distributions that are conditional to latent (hidden) Gaussian correlated variables. In this multivariate Poisson lognormal-model, the dependency structure is completely captured by the latent layer. This parametric model enables to account for the effects of covariates on the counts.

To perform network inference, we take advantage of well established methodologies developed in the Gaussian framework. Assuming that the ecological network is sparse (only a small fraction of pairs of species actually interact), we add a sparsity inducing constraint on the inverse covariance matrix of the latent Gaussian vector. Unlike the usual Gaussian setting, the penalized likelihood is generally not tractable, and we resort to a variational approach for approximate likelihood maximization. The corresponding optimization problem is solved by alternating a gradient ascent on the variational parameters and a graphical-Lasso step on the covariance matrix.

We illustrate how the proposed approach can be used to reconstruct ecological networks on some examples. We emphasize that accounting for covariates (which is mostly never done in the existing literature) changes drastically the topology of the inferred network.

Reference: Chiquet, J., Mariadassou, M., & Robin, S. (2018). arXiv:1806.03120.
