Mikael Falconnet 
UMR CNRS 8071 / INRA / Univ. Evry, France
<mikael.falconnet@gmail.com>

Substitution processes with translocation mechanisms

We define Markov processes on the integer lattice as the
superimposition of two mechanisms: an evolution of the sites according to a
substitution process on a finite alphabet where the rates depend possibly
of the neighbors, and translocations with possibly infinite range. We
consider several cases and prove in every of them that the process is
ergodic.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Pierre Pudlo
UMR CNRS 5149 / Univ. Montpellier II, France
<pierre.pudlo@univ-montp2.fr>

Computing Bayesian posterior with empirical likelihood in population
genetics

In population genetics, the computation of the likelihood is often a
hard problem. Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) is certainly the
most used algorithm to bypass this computation in a Bayesian paradigm
(see [1], for a recent survey). But ABC is quite time consuming and
needs massive paralellization to be efficient. In this talk we will
present a promising alternative using the empirical likelihood
[4].


That last method profiles the likelihood in a nonparametric way using
an estimating equation on the unknown parameters. Our proposal relies
on the score functions given by the pairwise composite likelihood [2]
which can be explicitly computed in a large variety of evolutionary
scenarii when considering microsatellite loci with the stepwise
mutation model [3]. Numerical simulations will exhibit that the
posterior estimated with our proposal is comparable to the ABC
posterior, but that the computation is about thirty times faster.

[1] M. Beaumont.  Approximate Bayesian computation in evolution and ecology.  Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst., 41:379--406, 2010.

[2] B. G. Lindsay.  Composite Likelihood Methods.  Contemporary Mathematics, 80:221--239, 1988.

[3] T. Ohta and M. Kimura.  A model of mutation appropriate to estimate the number of electrophoretically detectable alleles in a finite population.  Genet. Res., 22:201--204, 1973.

[4] A. B. Owen.  Empirical Likelihood ratio confidence intervals for a single functional.  Biometrika, 75:237--249, 1988



-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Sophie Schbath-Grammagnat
INRA, UR 1077, Mathematique, Informatique et Genome, F78352
Jouy-en-Josas, France
<Sophie.Schbath@jouy.inra.fr>

Metabolic network comparison based on coloured motif occurrences

Various methods have been recently employed to characterise the
structure of biological networks. In particular, the concept of
network motif and the related one of coloured motif have proven useful
to model the notion of a functional/evolutionary building block. Here
we are interested in comparing two metabolic networks, viewed as
graphs whose nodes represent reactions and are coloured according to
the class of enzymes that catalyze reactions, based on their
composition in small coloured motifs. We build an ad-hoc distance
between two graphs which takes into account the colour frequency in
the graphs and the probabilities of connection. For this, we use the
exact expectation and covariance of counts of coloured motifs in
coloured Erdos-Renyi random graphs (Schbath et al., 2009). Used
iteratively, our method allows to provide the most discriminating
coloured motifs.  (joint work with Stephane Robin and Elie-Laurent
Benaroya)

Schbath, S., Lacroix, V. and Sagot, M.-F. (2009). Assessing the
exceptionality of coloured motifs in networks. EURASIP Journal on
Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.


