Dear Speakers of the “Emerging Topics in Biological Networks and Systems Biology” symposium,
We are delighted to welcome you to the Swedish Collegium for Advanced Study (SCAS) in Uppsala for the symposium to be held on 9-11 October, 2017. With this email, I would like to inform you about some practical details regarding your visit to Uppsala, please see below and enclosed.
YOUR LECTURE
The symposium will be held at SCAS in the Thunberg Hall, Linneanum (www.swedishcollegium.se<http://www.swedishcollegium.se>).  Lectures are 25-30 minutes followed by 5 minutes for questions. Please see the enclosed file for an updated version of the programme. It is also available online.

The lecture hall is furnished with state-of-the-art audiovisual technical equipment.
If you intend to use a ppt presentation during your talk, please send us the ppt file in advance, so that it can be set up ahead of the session. This will save time between lectures.
If you need us to print any handouts etc., please send us the materials in advance (by 5 October at the latest).

I kindly ask those of you who have not yet submitted a title, abstract and short bio to do so at your earliest convenience. Thank you.

TRAVEL
If you have already contacted us regarding your journey, your air/train ticket has been sent to you via email. If you have not yet contacted us, please do so at your earliest convenience.
If you for some reason have booked the flight yourself, please send me a copy of the itinerary so that we can arrange for a taxi to pick you up at Arlanda airport and confirm arrival with the hotel. If you intend to claim reimbursement and have not yet clarified the details with us, please make sure that you contact us regarding this well in advance of the symposium. Please see the travel form for further information.

Ground transportation in Sweden:
We will arrange for transport to and from Arlanda airport/Uppsala*. A taxi will wait for you at Arlanda airport upon arrival. Please look out for a sign with your name.
Please provide us with your mobile number in case you have not already filled it in in the travel form. We need to give your number to the taxi company, so that the driver can reach you if needed.

When you are at SCAS for the symposium, please speak to my colleague Pia Hultgren regarding the preferred departure time for the taxi ride to Arlanda airport for your return flight, and she will book a taxi accordingly.
Pia is available during office hours (approx.. 09:00 -17:00).

*unless otherwise agreed.

VISA
If someone needs any document from us (in addition to the letter of invitation) in order to be able to apply for a visa, please contact us.

ACCOMMODATION
We have made reservations for all speakers at Grand Hotell Hörnan (www.grandhotellhornan.com/en/<http://www.grandhotellhornan.com/en/>) in central Uppsala. The hotel is situated within walking distance (approx.. 10-15 minutes) from the Collegium and (approx.. 5 minutes) from the train station. Please see the enclosed map.
Hotel address: BANGÅRDSGATAN 1 | 753 20 UPPSALA

MEALS and ALLERGIES/FOOD PREFERENCES
Please inform of us of any food allergies and/or if you prefer a vegetarian option at your earliest convenience, but no later than on 28 September.
All meals (lunch and dinner) will be pre-ordered and it is therefore important that we have been notified of any allergies etc. in advance.
Breakfast:
Breakfast is served at the hotel between 7 a.m. and 10 a.m.
Lunch:
Lunch is served in the lunch room at SCAS on Tuesday, 10 October and Wednesday, 11 October.
(Speakers and SCAS Fellows only).
Dinner:
A buffet dinner will be served in the Thunberg Dining Room at SCAS  in the evening of Tuesday, 10 October.
(All participants).
Coffee/tea:
Coffee/tea will be served in the Thunberg Dining Room at SCAS during the morning and afternoon breaks.
(All participants).
Please see the enclosed programme for further details.
In case you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to contact me.
I will send you an updated version of the programme closer to your arrival.
I look forward to meeting you all in October.
With kind regards from Uppsala,
Sandra

